---
title: 'C #5 | Function & Math Operations'
excerpt: "Get to know on how to perform basic math computations, arithmetic and logic."
category: tutorial
layout: post
comments: true
tags: [tutorial, C]
---

For the complete list of the tutorial on this blog, you can check these following links:

[1. Introduction][0] <br>
[2. First C-Program][2] <br>
[3. Types and Variables][3] <br>
[4. Conditional Statements][4] <br>
[**5. Function and Math Operations**][5] <br>
[6. Arrays][6] <br>
[7. Pointers][7] <br>
[8. I/O in C][8] <br>

-----

Now that you should have some basic on C, such as variables, data type, basic I/O, and control flow (conditional & loops), this part of the tutorial, we will learn more about function and math operations in C. Some compile-able examples are provided to help you to gain better understanding. We will try to design a C code to compute a math quadratic polynomial with specific inputs.

### Function in C

Function is a group statements that together they perform a specific task. At least, one function `main()`always be found on C program. A programmer can divide his code into separate functions. These functions can be located in different files, later on we will call this source codes. A group of source codes containing independent functions called library.

The C standard library provides numerous built-in functions that can be called without us defining them. We have used `printf()` function so far to let some texts to be displayed. Each built-in functions have specific purposes and mostly, we have to include corresponding header `#include <header>` to be able to use the built-in functions.

We can define our own function that will work depends on how we want them to. However, ones must know the general form of a function within C language.

{% highlight c %}
return_type function_name( arg_type parameters, ... )
{
    body of the function

    return (return_type) value
}
{% endhighlight %}

`return_type` is the type datas of the value that the function will return. In other words, when we call a function **B** from function **A**, we're expecting something happen inside the function **B** and when the function ends, it has some values that will be used by the calling function **A**. There are several ways for function **B** to pass this value to **A**, but for now we will use `return`. If the function does not have any value to return, then the `return_type` can be set to `void`, *e.g*, `void main()`. `arg_type` defines type of the data for the input arguments, *e.g*, int, char, float, etc. It is exactly similar with how you declare a variable in the main code block.

{% gist 801bff698247982f2d20 %}

To find a square root product in C, the native built-in function is `sqrt()`.To use this function, we must include corresponding library for it in **line:02**. As you observe the whole codes, we have two additional functions to the `main()` function, `quadratic()` and `squareRoot()`.   

In **line:5**, on function `quadratic()` declaration, it has `int` return type because in the application, whenever we call it, we expect the function to return the result of a quadratic computation from variable `int a`. Meanwhile, `squareRoot()` function has different return type, which is `float` because we're gonna deal with real numbers as a result of square root computation from `float b`.

Another difference between these two functions, is how the declaration and code blocks are located. `quadratic()` function has both declaration and code block located before `main()`. The code block spans from **line:6** to **8**. While `squareRoot()` has been declared before `main()` in **line:11** with the code block is presented after `main()` from **line:23** to **26**. This will have same result in the end, just matter of preference on how you as the programmer feel comfort with one of them. Please do notice on latter method, you have to write the full function name twice.

Now, when you started to develop a big C program, probably you will encounter numerous of independent function that needs to be called from different files. Next section will give you the big picture with examples.

### Multiple Source Codes in C

Now, let's split the code into separate files. First, create header `source.h` that consist declaration of every functions. Generally, other than the function declarations, macro parameters are found in header as well.

{% gist 8bd26165ecf6b6e9ab3c %}

Afterward, define what will happen inside of each functions on the source file, `source.c`. Start by including the header file on top of the code. This is optional actually if you use C99 compiler. If the name of the header and the source (just the name, without file extension) are same, in this case `source`, then actually you don't have to write `#include "source.h"` inside `source.c`. It will linked automatically thanks to the smart compiler.

{% gist 4f6941f3a7a50fb7d7a7 %}

For now, we have fully modular source codes for function `quadratic()` and `squareRoot()`. As the functions are ready, now other functions can use those functions just by calling the header name. Let's `main()` inside `main.c` calls both functions. Keep in mind, that here we assume that all of these files are located in same directory.

<pre>
+ directory
|__ source.h
|__ source.c
|__ main.c
</pre>

However, you can also put the source codes inside a directory, *e.g.* `src` like this,

<pre>
+ directory
|__ + src
|   |__ source.h
|   |__ source.h
|__ main.c
</pre>

and modify the `main.c` to link to the proper directory of `source.h` like this `#include "src/source.h"`.

{% gist 765314056037b7a3f37a %}

### Compile Multiple Source Files

Allright, so we have `source.c` in addition to `main.c`. Both have to be compiled in order to make an executable program. As there is a function inside `source.c` that is invoked within `main.c`, we have to link the corresponding object in compilation. Following command is the fastest and straightforward to generate an executable program named `programTest`:

<pre>
$ gcc main.c source.c -o programTest
</pre>

In sort, when the compilation happen, it transforms source code written in C language into some binary codes which known as object code. This object code can only be read by the machine. However, as the compiling process is done, both object files from the sources are deleted and leave only the executable program. Same result can also be achieved using a method that compiles each source files separately to retain the object files.

<pre>
$ gcc -c source.c
$ gcc -c main.c
$ gcc source.o main.o -o programTest
</pre>

This second method will give you two object files `*.o`. Then the third line will link both of them to become an executable program named `programTest`. Now, when there is a modifincation on certain file, *e.g.*, `source.c`, then we have to update the object file of `source.o`, thus we just need to compile the corresponding source to update the object code.

<pre>
$ gcc -c source.c
$ gcc source.o main.o -o programTest
</pre>

Note that `main.c` does not need to be compiled. Thus, time to rebuild the whole program is much shorter considering that probably we'll gonna have much more source codes than our circumstance right now.


### Arithmetic Operators

C programming language contains some mathematical operators. All of the arithmetic operators are shown on table below. Assume that two variables are given, `A` and `B` with assigned values are 10 and 5 respectively. These two variables are called operands. From the table you can find the result from each operations.


| **symbols** |        **functions**        | 	**results** 		|
|:------:|:----------------------|:-------------------|
|    +   | adding two operands   | A + B equals to 15  |
|    -   | subtract two operands | A - B equals to 5   |
|    *   | multiply two operands               | A * B equals to 50  |
|    /   | divide two operands                 | A / B equals to 2   |
|    %   | modulus, remainder     | A % B equals to 0   |
| 	 ++  | increment, increase value | A++ will give 11    |
|    --  | decrement, decrease value | B-- will give 4     |

Keep in mind that each operations can be used to form more complex calculations and over time, performance of your C codes is judged by how efficient the design of algorithm on C level. Now, let's write a function to compute some practical math problems.

$$
\begin{align*}
	& y = x^2 + x + 5
\end{align*}
$$

We have a quadratic polynomial function that takes `x` as an input and store the result on `y`. The value of `x` can be arbitrary, thus we would like to use `float x` and store the output to `float y`.

We can initiate the function, let's call it `polyQuadratic`. It will take `float x` as an input and return a float value, thus the function itself has to be declared using float data type.

Let's add the function into `source.h` where two previous functions exist.

{% highlight c %}
float polyQuadratic (float x);
{% endhighlight %}

The computation itself requires a quadratic operation and addition. For the quadratic, let's utilise already defined `quadratic()` function. However, we will encounter an issue here because of the difference on data type between return value of `quadratic()` which is integer and the input data, which is `float x`. However, such this problem, can be solved using casting. The compiler will automatically change one type of data into another if it makes sense. For instance, if you assign an integer value to a floating-point variable, the compiler will insert code to convert the `int` to a `float`.

{% highlight c %}
float polyQuadratic (float x)
{
	return ((float)quadratic((int)x) + x + 5);
}
{% endhighlight %}

The idea is, as `quadratic()` takes an integer input, while the input here is `float`, we have to tell compiler to assume that it is an integer. Thus, `(int)x` will cast `float x` into something similar with `int x`. But you should be warned that the value of `float` will be rounded to closest decimal. Second implementation of casting here is to cast return value of `quadratic()` to `float` although it is not necessary. An integer value doesn't need a casting if it is gonna be used with float numbers. You will get some potential warning from the compiler though.

You can check the final `sourceModified.h`, `sourceModified.c` and `main.c` below.

{% gist 89cc6dc613a569d46ad1 %}

{% gist 171211924000e11e8cf1 %}

{% gist a09ab012f83eb6cb40ce %}

The `x` as the input for the equation should be arbitrary. However, for the simplicity 5 is just the value that pops out in my head. Thus, `y` value after computation should be 35.

{%highlight ruby%}
welcome to the simplest example ever
calculate y = x^2 + x + 5 with x is set to 5.000000
entering the black-box...
we've got the result now!
y-value is 35.000000
{%endhighlight%}

Next, we will learn about how C stores sequences of same element datas, known as [array][1].

Cheers!

[1]: http://yanuartadityan.github.io/tutorial/c-tutor-6
