---
title: 'C Tutorial #6 | I/O in C'
excerpt: "Further materials on how C handles user inputs, how users can pass input as arguments, and how program can save what users typed."
category: tutorial
layout: post
comments: true
tags: [tutorial, C]
---

Allright, so far we've just used all static values. Every values are staticly predefined and a program would be useless without some way to talk to the users of the program. If you consider yourself a user, and your colleague as a program, then you'll supply him with informations about stuffs. And your colleague has to be able to catch those supplies and do something as predetermined before else. 

This way of communication is called **input output** (I/O). One way to communicate that we've learned and implemented is `printf()`, which tells the program to deliver some informations to users. 

Let's start by knowing what `printf` can do.

{% highlight c %}
printf("Hello World");
{% endhighlight %}

That is pretty much regular usage of `printf`, printing **Hello World** string into the display. If you have a variable, then you can let `printf` to put it with help of format specifier `%`.

{% highlight c %}
int a = 5;
int b = 10;
int c = a + b;

printf("a is %d, b is %d, the sum would be %d", a, b, c);
{% endhighlight%}

And the output will exactly the same as this more efficient, less variable usage `printf`:

<pre>
printf("a is %d, b is %d, the sum would be %d", a, b, a+b);
</pre>

**Casting** also can be used, to let compiler treat some values to a different type, for example you want to print integer values from float (albeit the value will be rounded) like this:

<pre>
float phi = 3.14;

printf("the value of phi is %d", (int)phi);
</pre>

Always make sure that you watch your variables value, as rounded values could lead into different meaning from several constant, *e.g*, **phi** value. Always use float or double to represent these kind of constants.